Demonstrators around the world have taken to the streets to protest against the killing of veteran Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh.
Abu Akleh, 51, was fatally shot on May 11 when Israeli forces opened fire on journalists reporting on raids in the Jenin refugee camp in the occupied West Bank.
(Al Jazeera)
Following Abu Akleh’s death, a number of international organisations including the United Nations called for an independent investigation, while people gathered in cities such as London to condemn the killing and to protest against the Israeli occupation of Palestine.
The map and list below show the locations where sizeable protests have occurred. It will be updated as more protests take place.

Cities where protests have taken place:
Amman, Amsterdam, Auckland, Baghdad, Beirut, Belfast, Bethlehem, Birmingham, Bonn, Chicago, Cologne, Copenhagen, Dublin, Edinburgh, Gaza City, Haifa, Hebron, Idlib, Istanbul, Jenin, Karachi, Khartoum, Krakow, London, Los Angeles, Madrid, Manchester, Melbourne, Mogadishu, Nablus, New Delhi, New York, Oslo, Paris, San Francisco, Sydney, Toulouse, Tunis, and Washington, DC.
NEW YORK, NY – MAY 15: A protestor holds photo of slain Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh on May 15, 2022 in the Bay Ridge neighbourhood of the Brooklyn borough of New York City. Hundreds gathered to march through the streets in honour of the slain journalist on Nakba, a day that marks the elimination of the Palestinian homeland in 1948. (Photo by Alex Kent/Getty Images)
A protester holds a picture of slain Al Jazeera reporter Shireen Abu Akleh during a demonstration in front of the Israeli embassy to support Palestinians, in Athens on May 16, 2022. (Photo by Louisa GOULIAMAKI / AFP) (AFP)
A Palestinian woman holds a poster of recently slain journalist Shireen Abu Akleh during a rally to mark the 74th anniversary of the Nakba or ‘catastrophe’, in the occupied West Bank town of Ramallah on May 15, 2022 [Abbas Momani/AFP]
Rally in central London for the murdered Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh
NEW YORK, NY – MAY 15: A Jewish man holds an image of Palestinian journalist Shireen Abu Akleh on May 15, 2022 in the Bay Ridge neighbourhood of the Brooklyn borough of New York City. Hundreds gathered to march through the streets in honour of the slain journalist on Nakba, a day that marks the elimination of the Palestinian homeland in 1948. (Photo by Alex Kent/Getty Images)
A man writes a message for the Palestinian-American journalist Shireen Abu Akleh during a memorial and rally in her honour outside The New York Times office building, in New York, New York, USA, 13 May 2022. Speakers criticised The New York Times and other western media outlets for how they chose to report the killing of Akleh. EPA-EFE/SARAH YENESEL (EPA)

A youth beats a drum while students carry a mock coffin during a symbolic funeral for slain Al Jazeera journalist Shireen Abu Akleh, as others wave their national flags at al-Azhar University in Mughraqa, central Gaza Strip, Monday, May 16, 2022. Abu Akleh was shot and killed while covering an Israeli raid in the occupied West Bank town of Jenin last Wednesday. (AP Photo/Adel Hana)